Procedural macros design document (#1109)
software-mansion/scarb: design/01-proc-macro.md

This document proposes an evolution of Cairo’s compiler plugins system. The primary motivation behind this proposal is to allow dynamic loading of compiler plugins per compilation unit. This document specifies syntax for the definition of procedural macros, a high-level view of their implementation in the compiler, and outlines how they interact with the compilation process.

## Context

### Rust procedural macros

This post assumes reader knowledge on Rust's procedural macros and how they are implemented. A good walkthrough has been published some time ago on IntelliJ Rust blog:

1. https://blog.jetbrains.com/rust/2022/03/18/procedural-macros-under-the-hood-part-i/
2. https://blog.jetbrains.com/rust/2022/07/07/procedural-macros-under-the-hood-part-ii/

### System programming primitives

This post assumes reader knowledge on foreign function interface (FFI) mechanisms in modern operating systems.

### Plugins API

> The Cairo compiler has a system of semantic plugins, that allow generating Cairo code with Rust code. The entry point of compiler plugins API is the [`MacroPlugin`] trait, which, via another mechanisms, boils down to allowing users to provide a callback, which:

Reviewer: nit, several links like this are dead

1. Takes a reference to compiler's syntax database ([`SyntaxGroup`], i.e. compiler state until right after parsing is done).
2. Takes an [`ast::ModuleItem`](https://github.com/starkware-libs/cairo/blob/4821865770ac9e57442aef6f0ce82edc7020a4d6/crates/cairo-lang-syntax/src/node/ast.rs#L8718).
3. Produces a struct that:
    - Can remove the `ModuleItem`.
    - Can contain Cairo code (as a virtual source file) to inject as a submodule.
    - Emits compiler diagnostics.
    - Can emit additional arbitrary data structure along generated file.

Macro plugins are executed on each node in the Cairo AST.

Custom plugins can be fed to the compiler via [`RootDatabaseBuilder::with_plugin_suite` API](https://github.com/starkware-libs/cairo/blob/8290898d602f87fb5bc3a18f28a42430cf6d3fdc/crates/cairo-lang-compiler/src/db.rs#L96). It takes a [`PluginSuite` object](https://github.com/starkware-libs/cairo/blob/8290898d602f87fb5bc3a18f28a42430cf6d3fdc/crates/cairo-lang-semantic/src/plugin.rs#L18-L25), which defines a set of objects implementing the [`MacroPlugin` trait](https://github.com/starkware-libs/cairo/blob/8290898d602f87fb5bc3a18f28a42430cf6d3fdc/crates/cairo-lang-defs/src/plugin.rs#L80).

> Scarb currently simply assumes a fixed, predefined plugin sets for `lib`, `starknet-contract` and `test` targets. This interface is not stable and is subject to changes in future compiler versions.

Reviewer: That's not true anymore, because now we have builtin packages that provide plugins

### Declaring package dependencies on plugins

Scarb allows packages to declare dependency on a plugin through the same mechanism as on standard Cairo libraries. The plugin must be defined as a Scarb package defining `cairo-plugin` target in the package manifest.

Since currently there is no mechanism to supply plugins implementation, it must be compiled into Scarb itself.
The `starknet` and `test_plugin` plugins are supplied this way.

## Guide-level explanation

This document proposes an introduction of new compiler plugins type, called procedural macros, as described below.

### Procedural macro user perspective

To use a procedural macro, a Cairo programmer will have to:
- Declare a dependency on a package, that implements the procedural macro, by adding it to the `dependencies` field in the Scarb manifest file.
- Use the procedural macro in Cairo code, by calling it, or adding an attribute or derive macro to a Cairo item.

The overall complexity of the actual procedural macro execution should be hidden from the user abstraction level.

> In particular, this two steps can be performed without any knowledge of Rust, or even the fact that the procedural macro is implemented in Rust.

Reviewer: New macro downloads will require having Rust compiler installed though. This is worth noting here imho

- The result enum will contain one of three values:
    - `ProcMacroResult::Leave` - procedural macro does not take any action
    - `ProcMacroResult::Replace({ TokenStream, AuxData })` - procedural macro has generated code that replaces input
    - `ProcMacroResult::Remove` - original code should be removed
    - `ProcMacroResult::Bail(ProcMacroDiagnostics)` - procedural macro exited with an error
- Alongside the new TokenStream, a procedural macro can emit auxiliary data, encoded as an arbitrary JSON.

A `TokenStream` definition:
- A token can be defined as a string with one of three kinds assigned to it during parsing.
- The token kinds are: identifier, punctuation symbol and literal.
- Kinds of different tokens can be represented as an enum called `TokenTree`.
- An iterator over token trees is called a `TokenStream`. A `TokenStream` is a representation of a Cairo code.
- The `TokenStream` are plain Cairo tokens that will be parsed by the procedural macro implementation itself.

Example:

```toml
[package]
name = "some-macro"
version = "0.1.0"

[cairo-plugin]
```

```rust

> /// The entry point of procedural macro implementation.
> pub fn generate_code(token_stream: TokenStream) -> ProcMacroResult {
>     // no-op
>     ProcMacroResult::Leave
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
use cairo-lang-macro::{inline_macro, ProcMacroResult, TokenStream};

/// The entry point of procedural macro implementation.
#[inline_macro]
pub fn some_macro(token_stream: TokenStream) -> ProcMacroResult {
    // no-op
    ProcMacroResult::Leave
}
```

1. Let's emphasize usage of the API crate.
2. This outline does not say how macro name and kind is determined.
3. Without `extern "C"` Rust will mangle the `generate_code` name, so it wasn't a good FFI entrypoint. Wrapping this into custom procmacro will allow us to hide this implementation detail.

Author: Actually, wouldn't it be easier to use package name as macro name? 🤔

Reviewer: no, because I imagine it would be popular to have single package exposing a collection of related macros

Author: I understand this would be nice to have, but it would also open other problems - like we could no longer rely on scarb resolve to ensure no two macros with same name are declared.

Reviewer: I think an ability to easily bundle multiple macros together, with shared state and code etc. is much bigger benefit than simplifying duplicate names check (which actually should boil down to just looping over all loaded plugins before feeding them into the DB as far as I imagine)

```

## Reference-level explanation

### Procedural macros will be compiled into shared libraries

- Procedural macros will be implemented in Rust.
- Procedural macros will be compiled into shared libraries, that Scarb can load at the runtime through dynamic loading mechanism of the host operating system.
- Procedural macros will be compiled to `.dylib` files on OSX, `.so` files on Linux and `.dll` on Windows.
- Scarb will use [`libloading` crate](https://docs.rs/libloading/latest/libloading/), which exposes a cross-platform interface for interactions with platform dynamic library loading primitives, to load shared libraries into memory.

> ### Procedural macros will be special Scarb packages containing Rust code

Reviewer: Two questions to resolve here:
1. Should the auto-generated Cargo.toml be included in package archives? Or should Scarb always re-generate Cargo.toml before compiling. Both variants have pros and cons I believe.
2. How will we control what version of the `cairo-lang-macro` crate will be used? How users will control compatibility with Scarb releases?

Author: 1. Personally, I think it should be regenerated on each project resolution. This will avoid problem of compatibility of the file content between Scarb versions. 
2. One idea I have is to treat the cairo-lang-macro versioning similar to what we do with `starknet` package today. That is, use a version equal to Scarb version.

Reviewer: Ad 1. 👍🏻 
Ad 2. So you mean that users will use `cairo-version` to determine what `cairo-lang-macro` version are they targeting? I wonder if this wouldn't be too restrictive for us, and it wouldn't be better to decouple versioning schemes for these; like Rust's `syn`/`quote` crates do

Author: Updated with information about separate versioning of interface crates

- The Cargo manifest generation, followed by the Cargo resolution of procedural macro packages, will be handled during the Scarb workspace resolution.
- The compiled procedural macros will be cached on the user filesystem in Scarb cache directory, to ensure no recompilation on each Scarb project build is required.

**Example:**

Scarb manifest file:

```toml
[package]
name = "some-macro"
version = "0.1.0"

[cairo-plugin]
```

Automatically generated Cargo manifest file:

```toml
# Code generated by scarb fetch; DO NOT EDIT.
#
# The Cargo.toml file for Cairo procedural macros crates is entirely managed by Scarb,
# the Cairo package manager. Scarb regenerates this file whenever it processes Scarb.toml.
# The simplest way to trigger this, is to run the `scarb fetch` command.
#
# If you want to provide custom data in this file, include it in Scarb.toml under
# [tool.cargo.pkg] section. For example, to add Rust dependencies, type the following:
#
#     [tool.cargo.pkg.dependencies]
#     serde = "1"
#     serde_json = "1"

[package]
name = "ignore-plugin"
version = "0.1.0"

[lib]
crate-type = "dylib"

[dependencies]
cairo-lang-macro = "1.0.0-alpha.7"
```

> ### Procedural macro packages can be used as regular dependencies

Reviewer: These two sections are duplicated. Do you have a reasoning behind doing this? 🤔

Author: Just in case someone skipped guide-level proposal and went straight to the reference-level one. I will reword the former to avoid straight duplication.

Reviewer: You can just make references instead of copying paragraphs

Author: Replaced with a reference.

	// Implementation skipped for brevity.
}
```

The communication between Scarb and the procedural macros will have to be implemented in such a manner, that:

- Will be forward and backward compatible regardless of changes in the Cairo compiler internals (including the Cairo AST).
- Can be established over the FFI barrier.

In order to meet the specified requirements, instead of syntax tree nodes, we can rather pass plain Cairo tokens which will be parsed by the procedural macro itself.

A token can be defined as a string with one of three kinds assigned to it during parsing. The token kinds are: identifier, punctuation symbol and literal. Kinds of different tokens can be represented as an enum called TokenTree. An iterator over TokenTrees is called a TokenStream. A TokenStream is a representation of a Cairo code.

Implementation of the communication protocol will require some adjustments in the Cairo language parser, so that it can be used for TokenStreams. Namely, it should be possible to use TokenStreams as input instead of Cairo files, skipping the lexical analysis required for Cairo files (as TokenStream can already be analyzed on the compiler side).

## **Drawbacks**

> - Since shared libraries are loaded into the process memory space, some errors in the execution might result in hard to debug segmentation faults.

Reviewer: I've been thinking of extracing Scarb's compiler machinery into a separate binary, that would be run as separate process. That level of isolation would at least prevent memory corruption from killing entire Scarb execution, so `scarb build` will at least be able to recover with good error message.

Author: I will note this in "future possibilities" section if you are ok with that.

Reviewer: That would be great!

> - Procedural macros are also in fact just Rust code run on end user’s hardware. This makes them more susceptible to bad actors actions, than a standard Cairo source code. Thus, Procedural macros should always be treated with special attention, and only ones from trusted sources should be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Procedural macros are also in fact just Rust code run on end user’s hardware. This makes them more susceptible to bad actors actions, than a standard Cairo source code. Thus, procedural macros should always be treated with special attention, and only ones from trusted sources should be used.
```

- The procedural macro implementation will return a `ProcMacroResult` defined in the helper library. The enum will contain one of three values:
    - `ProcMacroResult::Leave` - procedural macro does not take any action
    - `ProcMacroResult::Replace({ TokenStream, AuxData })` - procedural macro has generated code that replaces input
    - `ProcMacroResult::Remove` - original code should be removed
    - `ProcMacroResult::Bail(ProcMacroDiagnostics)` - procedural macro exited with an error
- Alongside the new TokenStream, a procedural macro can emit auxiliary data, encoded as an arbitrary JSON.
- The appropriate procedural macros will be executed based on the call in Cairo code by the new Cairo compiler internal `ProcMacroHost` plugin. This plugin will be called on each AST node and will decide if analyzed fragment requires code generation powered by an external plugin.

**Example:**

The procedural macro source code:

```rust
pub fn generate_code(token_stream: TokenStream) -> ProcMacroResult {
	// Implementation skipped for brevity.
}

> ```

Reviewer: Outdated. I strongly suggest making references to the guide instead of copy-pasting exactly because of this reason 😅

In contrast to current behaviour of Cairo plugins, no longer will they be executed on each node of AST.

The procedural macro will be triggered by one of three Cairo expressions
- Macro call, e.g. `xyz!`
- Macro attribute, e.g. `#[xyz]`
- Macro derive, e.g. `#[derive(Xyz)]`

**Example:**

Scarb manifest file:

```toml
[package]
name = "hello-macros"
version = "0.1.0"

[dependencies]
add-macro = "0.1.0"
tracing-macro = "0.1.0"
to-value-macro = "0.1.0"
```

Cairo source file:

```cairo
use add_macro::add;
use tracing_macro::instrument;
use to_value_macro::ToValue;

#[derive(ToValue)]
struct Input {
    value: felt252, 
}

#[instrument]
fn main() -> felt252 {
    let a = Input { value: 1 };
    let b = Input { value: 2 };
    add!(a.to_value(), b.to_value());
}
```

### Procedural macro author perspective

To implement a procedural macro, a programmer will have to:
- Create a new package, with a `Scarb.toml` manifest file and a `src/` directory besides.
- The manifest file must define a `cairo-plugin` target type.
- Write a Rust library, inside the `src/` directory, that implements the procedural macro API.

> - Note, that the package does not contain any `Cargo.toml` file, as it will be generated by Scarb.

Reviewer 2: Will a user be able to add needed rust packages as dependencies to the macro package?

Reviewer 3: Yes, I think you're looking for [this](https://github.com/software-mansion/scarb/pull/1109/files#diff-fa728b0211f1a1dbe27555484d8998cb7f4dd6970c00f90171419cfb5a585643R212)

Author: Yes, it will be possible.

- Scarb will use [`libloading`](https://crates.io/crates/libloading) for loading built procedural macros shared objects.

### Procedural macro API in Cairo plugins

- The procedural macro has to be called from Cairo code in order to be executed during the compilation. In contrast to current behaviour of Cairo plugins, no longer will they be executed on each node of AST.
- The procedural macro will be triggered by one of three Cairo expressions
    - Macro call, e.g. `xyz!`
    - Macro attribute, e.g. `#[xyz]`
    - Macro derive, e.g. `#[derive(Xyz)]`
- The API for writing procedural macros for Cairo will be published for programmers, versioned separately from Scarb. This will provide a stability for the procedural macro implementation.
- In total, the implementation will consist of three Rust crates, two of which will be visible by the macro author. These crates will be automatically added to the generated `Cargo.toml` file.
  - First one, called `cairo-lang-macro-interface`, will contain the API definitions of the `TokenStream` and `ProcMacroResult` types used as input and output for macro implementation.

>   - The second one, called `cairo-lang-macro-attributes`, will contain implementation of Rust macros used for wrapping procedural macro entrypoint function. This will hide details of FFI communication from the procedural macro author.

Reviewer: I think `-attributes` crate should be a dependency of the `-interface` one, and `-interface` should simply do `pub use _attributes::*`. That's what most crates do, for example `serde` vs `serde_derive`; or `clap`

Also, that way, the `-interface` part can be skipped imho

Author: Yep, reworded, thank you!
